---
layout: page
title: "Committing Your Work"
permalink: /gitref/comitting/create_commit
---

## Committing your code

[comment]: <> (TODO: Write up how a commit is like a way to store your work at that point.  May be another good workflow opportunity here.)

To make a commit and use the default editor to write your commit message (Git will bring up the editor when you run the command) use the command below.

[comment]: <> (TODO: Add link to config section where you specify what editor to use)

[comment]: <> (TODO: Add how to undo a commit completely if you made one by mistake.)

`git commit`

Commit and comment in single command.

`git commit -m "My commit message"`

### Good Commit Messages

* Should start with a single line that is no more than 50 characters long and described the change set followed by a blank line followed by a more detailed explanation.
* Write in imperative "Fix bug" versus "Fixed bug" or "Fixes bug"

Sample commit message

> Capitalized, short (50 chars or less) summary
>
> More detailed explanation if needed.  Keep it to around 72 chars.  Blank line separating summary from body is critical to make life easier when you use tools such as rebase.  Write in imperative to match the messages generated by git commands.
>
> More paragraphs can come after blank lines.
>
> - Bullet points are okay, too
>
> - Hyphen or asterisk is used for bullets followed by a single space and blank lines in between the bullets

## Updating (amending) a Commit

If you mess up a commit and want to change or add a file use `git commit --amend` as in the example below.  Your configured editor will pop up to allow you to modify the commit message.

```
git commit -m 'My commit message'
git add forgotten_or_updated_file
git commit --amend
```

If you want to modify the code of your last commit with the staged changes, but not the commit message use the command

[comment]: <> (TODO: Maybe want to make plain that you need to stash your change first.)

`git commit --amend --no-edit`

***WARNING:*** *Only amend commits that are in your local repository and have not been pushed to a remote repository.  Amending previously pushed commits and force pushing the branch will cause problems for your collaborators.*

[comment]: <> (TODO: Need a link here to the remote workflow sections.)